doc: component override basic conversion (#770)
front-commerce/developers.front-commerce.com: docs/02-guides/override-a-component.mdx

title: Override a component
description:
  This guide explains how to override a component in Front-Commerce, to

>   customize the chocolatine theme

Reviewer: I think it would be better to keep it as `theme-chocolatine`. This will help with keywords `@front-commerce/theme-chocolatine` and also be more consistent in the rest of the documentation

Reviewer: Although I think this should not reference any theme, because the override a component is not only for theme-chocolatine, it can be for any future themes, so I would keep it as default theme. The default theme here is referencing the default used by the integrators, either theme-chocolatine, or any other future theme.

Reviewer 2: I agree with both statements, I'd go with something among those lines:

```suggestion
  customize the theme of your application
```

Author: fixed with @Kagaminara suggestion

sidebar_position: 1
---

<p>{frontMatter.description}</p>

## Understanding theme overrides

Front-Commerce web application is a fully featured e-commerce
[universal](https://cdb.reacttraining.com/universal-javascript-4761051b7ae9)
React application aimed at providing a sane base for your own theme. Even though
you could reuse pages and components individually in a totally different theme,

> most of the time you might find easier and faster to start with the base theme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most of the time you might find easier and faster to start with a base theme
```

and iterate from there.

**Theme override is what allows you to:**

> - customize the
>   [chocolatine theme](/docs/remixed/extensions/theme-chocolatine/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- customize existing themes:
   - [theme-chocolatine](/docs/remixed/extensions/theme-chocolatine/),
```

> - customize how an extension is displayed,

Reviewer: The first bullet already covers this.

```suggestion
```

- upgrade Front-Commerce and benefit from the latest component improvements,

> - or create a slightly different theme for the Black Friday in confidence!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- or create a slightly different theme for events like Black Friday with confidence!
```

Having an understanding of
[themes in Magento](https://developer.adobe.com/commerce/frontend-core/guide/templates/),
[child themes in Wordpress](https://developer.wordpress.org/themes/advanced-topics/child-themes/)
/
[Prestashop](https://devdocs.prestashop-project.org/8/themes/reference/template-inheritance/parent-child-feature/),
[templates override in Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/theming-drupal/twig-in-drupal/working-with-twig-templates),
[themes in CakePHP](https://book.cakephp.org/3.0/en/views/themes.html) will help
you understand Front-Commerce’s theme overrides because they all share the same
philosophy. If you have no previous experience with these other implementations,
let’s see how it works!

Your own theme will be located in its own folder and will use default components

> from parent theme(s) — at least from Front-Commerce chocolatine theme. You would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from parent theme(s). You would
```

then copy the files you want to override in your theme folder by maintaining an
identical file structure. Your component will then be used instead of the one in
your parent theme(s).

This translates in those three steps:

1. configure your custom theme and use it in your application
2. copy the file (`jsx`, `scss` or `gql`) you want to override in the `theme`
   folder of the `app` directory
3. customize its content in your extension directory

> ## Creating the `theme` folder

Author: As this guide explain integrators that they must create theme folder to manage their overrides, i don't think that's necessary to provide one in skeleton

> ## Creating the `theme` folder

Reviewer 2: Fair enough !

### Using the skeleton as base

First we need to create the `theme` directory in your `app` folder

```
my-project
└── app
    └── theme
```

That’s it! You have successfully created the folder that will be the root of
your custom theme !

### In your own extension

You can also extend theme in your extension, please read
[Register an extension](/docs/remixed/guides/register-an-extension) guide to
know how to create your own extension.

First in your extension definition file, add the `theme` entry :

> ```javascript title="extension/my-extension/index.ts"

Reviewer: Easier to read if you assign it a "fake" name.

```suggestion
```javascript title="extension/theme-acme/index.ts"
```

import path from "path";
import { defineExtension } from "@front-commerce/core";

> export default function themeChocolatine() {

Reviewer: rename this:

```suggestion
export default function themeAcme() {
```

  return defineExtension({
    name: "MyExtension",
    // highlight-next-line
    theme: path.join(__dirname, "theme"),
    configuration: {
      providers: [],
    },
  });
}
```

And now theme file will be injected in your project !

## Override a component

Let's add the description of a `Product` to a `ProductItem` as an example of
overriding the base theme.

The original file is:
[`node_modules/@front-commerce/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.js`](https://gitlab.blackswift.cloud/front-commerce/front-commerce/-/blob/main/packages/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx)

:::info

Please refer to the
[Front-Commerce’s folder structure documentation page](/docs/2.x/concepts/front-commerce-folder-structure)
to get a better understanding of how components are organized in the base theme.

:::

1. copy it to:
   `extension/my-extension/theme/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx` or
   `app/theme/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx` (depending on the

>    [override method you've decided to use](#creating-the-theme-folder))

Reviewer 2: This could be much simpler to read (and understand) if you define some terms you reuse throughout the documentation.

**suggestion:** in `Creating the theme folder`, say something at the end like "Whatever method you use, we will refer to this folder as "theme" for the rest of this documentation."
That way, you can avoid having to state both way of doing each thing, and you'll just have to give paths such as `"theme/components/...`.

Author: Added a note

2. add the description after the `<ProductOverview />` component in your
   `ProductItem` with `{props.description}`.

**But you are not done yet!** The `description` information is not included in
the GraphQL fields fetched by the application in the base theme. You will thus
need to update the fragment related to `ProductItem`.

> The original fragment file is collocated with the original component at:

Reviewer 2: **thought:** As a first reader, it might be confusing to understand why it has to be this fragment that have to be overriden, even more now that we have two way of getting data (`routes` vs `useFetchers`) that don't use the same queries.

**suggestion:** Explain _quickly_ were does the data comes from (referencing other parts of the docs if needed) so that the updated fragment makes sense for the reader.

Author: Added a note

1. copy the
   [`original ProductItemFragment`](https://gitlab.blackswift.cloud/front-commerce/front-commerce/-/blob/main/packages/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItemFragment.gql?ref_type=heads)
   to the equivalent location in your extension.
1. add the field `description` to the fragment.

   ```diff title="app/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItemFragment.gql"
   fragment ProductItemFragment on Product {
     imageUrl
   + description
     ...ProductOverviewFragment
     ...ProductItemActionsFragment
   }
   ```

1. restart the application

The data will now be fetched from GraphQL every time the `ProductItem` is used
(product listings, upsells…) and will be available for you to render it as
wanted.

> ### Reuse the original component

Reviewer 2: **thought:** I'm not really sure to see the use case for this... It feels like overriding the component directly should even cover the example here?

Reviewer: There are some use cases where you would want to use the original component, for example, if I only want to extend the original component without overriding i would do

```tsx
// app/theme/modules/OriginalComponent

import OriginalComponent from "@front-commerce/theme/modules/OriginalComponent"

const ExtendedComponent = () => {
	return (
		<Stack>
			<h1>My Extended Component</h1>
			<OriginalComponent />
		</Stack>
	)
}

Front-Commerce has been designed with small components having a single
responsibility. **We believe that theme overrides should cover most of your use
cases**. For some features though, it appeared that reusing the base component
could be really useful. For instance, if you want to add a small feature or
wrapper without changing the core feature of a component.

It is possible to import a component from the
`@front-commerce/theme-chocolatine` node module in a standard way, as you would
import components from other libraries.

:::note

**Use with care!** We don't think that this method should be the default one,
because it can make your updates more painful.

:::

In the file that we've created in the previous section, instead of copying the
original source file you could set it up like this:

```jsx title="theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx"

> import React from "react";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> // eslint-disable-next-line no-restricted-imports (ESLint rule added in 2.19.0)

Reviewer: I think this rule is not active in v3

[themes in CakePHP](https://book.cakephp.org/3.0/en/views/themes.html) will help
you understand Front-Commerce’s theme overrides because they all share the same
philosophy. If you have no previous experience with these other implementations,
let’s see how it works!

Your own theme will be located in its own folder and will use default components
from parent theme(s). You would then copy the files you want to override in your
theme folder by maintaining an identical file structure. Your component will
then be used instead of the one in your parent theme(s).

This translates in those three steps:

1. configure your custom theme and use it in your application
2. copy the file (`jsx`, `scss` or `gql`) you want to override in the `theme`
   folder of the `app` directory
3. customize its content in your extension directory

## Creating the `theme` folder

:::info

Whatever method you use, we will refer to this folder as "theme" for the rest of
this documentation

:::

### Using the skeleton as base

First we need to create the `theme` directory in your `app` folder

```
my-project
└── app
    └── theme
```

That’s it! You have successfully created the folder that will be the root of

> your custom theme !

Reviewer 3: **nitpick:** in english, there's no space before punctuation

```suggestion
your custom theme!
```

Author: fixed

### In your own extension

You can also extend theme in your extension, please read
[Register an extension](/docs/remixed/guides/register-an-extension) guide to
know how to create your own extension.

> First in your extension definition file, add the `theme` entry :

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First in your extension definition file, add the `theme` entry:
```

Author: fixed with your suggestion

```javascript title="extension/theme-acme/index.ts"
import path from "path";
import { defineExtension } from "@front-commerce/core";

export default function themeAcme() {
  return defineExtension({
    name: "AcmeTheme",
    // highlight-next-line
    theme: path.join(__dirname, "theme"),
    configuration: {
      providers: [],
    },
  });
}
```

> And now theme file will be injected in your project !

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And now theme file will be injected in your project!
```

## Override a component

Let's add the description of a `Product` to a `ProductItem` as an example of
overriding the base theme.

The original file is:
[`node_modules/@front-commerce/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.js`](https://gitlab.blackswift.cloud/front-commerce/front-commerce/-/blob/main/packages/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx)

:::info

Please refer to the

> [Front-Commerce’s folder structure documentation page](/docs/2.x/concepts/front-commerce-folder-structure)

Reviewer 3: It will now be at:

```suggestion
[Front-Commerce’s folder structure documentation page](/docs/remixed/concepts/react-components-structure)
```

to get a better understanding of how components are organized in the base theme.

:::

1. copy it to: `theme/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItem.jsx`
2. add the description after the `<ProductOverview />` component in your
   `ProductItem` with `{props.description}`.

**But you are not done yet!** The `description` information is not included in
the GraphQL fields fetched by the application in the base theme. You will thus
need to update the fragment related to `ProductItem`.

:::info

In this case, the data fetching is made using a GraphQL request. Since our
component use data fetched by a GraphQL request, we need to update this fragment
to add the data we want to the request.

We invite you to read the
[request data flow](/docs/remixed/concepts/a-request-data-flow) to learn more

> about how data are fetched in Front-Commerce

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
about how data are fetched in Front-Commerce.
```

Author: fixed with your suggestion

1. copy the
   [`original ProductItemFragment`](https://gitlab.blackswift.cloud/front-commerce/front-commerce/-/blob/main/packages/theme-chocolatine/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItemFragment.gql?ref_type=heads)
   to the equivalent location in your extension.
2. add the field `description` to the fragment.

   ```diff title="app/theme/modules/ProductView/ProductItem/ProductItemFragment.gql"
   fragment ProductItemFragment on Product {
     imageUrl
   + description
     ...ProductOverviewFragment
     ...ProductItemActionsFragment
   }
   ```

3. restart the application

The data will now be fetched from GraphQL every time the `ProductItem` is used
(product listings, upsells…) and will be available for you to render it as
wanted.

### Reuse the original component

Front-Commerce has been designed with small components having a single
responsibility. **We believe that theme overrides should cover most of your use
cases**. For some features though, it appeared that reusing the base component
could be really useful. For instance, if you want to add a small feature or
wrapper without changing the core feature of a component.

> It is possible to import a component from the
> `@front-commerce/theme-chocolatine` node module in a standard way, as you would
> import components from other libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is possible to import a component from the
`@front-commerce/theme/` module instead of `theme`. It is similar to if you were importing components from other libraries.
```

Author: fixed with your suggestion
